Stability of Predator-Prey Dynamics Project Plan

2 Consumer-resource models

Lotka Volterra

dH/dt = bH − aPH
dP/dt = eaPH−sP
H (herbivore)=prey, P=predator, b=prey birth rate, a=predator attack rate, e=efficiency of prey to predators, s=predator death rate

Problem 1. draw a conceptual model using boxes and arrows; be sure to annotate the boxes with state variable symbols (H and P) and arrows with labels and parameter values that influence each arrow
Complete By Friday-Zoe 

Write Code for Problem 1. 
Complete By Friday-Soren 

Problem 2. Simulate dynamics with the following parameters and initial conditions: b = 0.5, a = 0.02, e = 0.1,s = 0.2, H0 = 25, P0 = 5. I recommend running simulations with time steps of 0.1.
Write Code for Problem 2 by Friday- Zoe 
Make Plots for Problem 2 by Sunday- Thomas

Problem 3. run a number of additional simulations changing one of the parameters at a time to learn how each parameter affects the dynamics of the populations. You should be able to increase or decrease each parameter by as much as a factor of 2 to 4 without causing major problems.
Modify plots and learn how it changes for Problem 3 by Monday - Zoe, Soren, Thomas

Based on your conceptual model and simulation dynamics, answer the following questions. Support your answers with graphical evidence from simulations or summary values from simulations.
• What can you say about the “role” of each parameter?
• what can you say about the role of predators in the simulations?
• what is the relationship between parameter values and predator-prey cycle length?
Answer Questions by Monday (nxt week) - Zoe Soren Thomas

Rosenzweig-MacArthur

Problem 1. draw a conceptual model using boxes and arrows; be sure to annotate the boxes with state variable symbols (H and P) and arrows with labels and parameter values that influence each arrow
Complete By Friday-Zoe 

Write Code for Problem 1. 
Complete By sunday -Soren 

Problem 2. simulate dynamics with the following parameters and initial conditions: b = 0.8, e = 0.07, s = 0.2, w = 5, d = 400, α = 0.001, H0 = 500, P0 = 120.
Write Code for Problem 2 by sun.- Zoe 
Make Plots for Problem 2 by tuesday next week- Thomas

Problem 3. run a number of additional simulations changing one of the parameters at a time to learn how each parameter affects the dynamics of the populations. You should be able to increase or decrease each parameter by as much as a factor of 2 to 4 without causing major problems.
Modify plots and learn how it changes for Problem 3 by wed next week - Zoe, Soren, Thomas

Based on your conceptual model and simulation dynamics, answer the following questions. Support your answers with graphical evidence from simulations or summary values from simulations.
• how do the dynamics differ from Lotka-Volterra?
• what can you say about the “role” of each parameter, especially what causes the dyamics to differ
between the L-V and R-M models?
• what is the relationship between parameter values and predator abundance?
Answer Questions by wednesday (nxt week) - Zoe Soren Thomas

The Paradox of Enrichment

Problem 1. Use the R-M consumer-resource model from above to simulate dynamics with carrying capcity varying from 800 to 2000
(α 0.00125 to 5e-4).
Simulate Dynamics by thursday next week- Soren

• what happens as carrying capacity increases?
• why do you think we see the Paradox of Enrichment?
Answer questions by thursday next week - Zoe Thomas
